# Algorithms & Models

## Goal

This lesson will provide a brief introduction to some of the most common machine learning algorithms in order to understand why they are commonly used. We will also look at how the algorithms solve real-world problems.

## Overview

In the last section we learned that ML algorithms are basically procedures run on data, and they output models. We identified several well-known algorithms. Let's look at each of them a bit more closely to see how and why they are best put to use to solve particular problems.

## Choosing the Right Model

The best suited model depends on the outcome you want. For example, to predict the gas mileage of a vehicle from historical data, a good choice would be a supervised learning model like linear regression. The desired outcome is to predict the relationship between variables to forecast on outcome. Remember, linear regression was define above as:

> best for finding out the relationship between variables and forecasting

To identify if a potential customer in a particular city with a particular income and commute is likely to purchase a particular vehicle, a decision tree might be a better choice because they are:

> like a flow chart where the class of an object is determined step-by-step using certain known conditions

<!-- livebook:{"break_markdown":true} -->

### Model Deployment

Once we have trained a model we need to make it available for use in testing or production environment. The model may be integrated with other applications.
